Morning, Joanna.
Yes. Excellent. Welcome along to our committee today.
Thank you. Wonderful to have you with us.
Um, we are live streaming this, this is the, uh,
hearing session for the BBMJ in terms of the biodiversity
beyond national jurisdiction.
Uh, we have seen your written submission.
We welcome you to speak to that.
Uh, we have 10 minutes allocated
and I'm sure there'll be some
questions from members as well.
But over to you. Thank
You. Wonderful
ko.
Um, I'm a professor of international law at Victoria,
university of Wellington
to aka I was a specialty in international law,
and as my submission mentions, I was, um, privileged
to be a me, a member of the New Zealand delegation
to the negotiations of this treaty.
Um, I've written extensively about the treaty
and its negotiations and spoken
to international audiences about it.
Um, so my written submissions explain why I strongly support
New Zealand ratifying the BB and j agreement,
and I'm happy
to answer any questions that might arise from that.
But perhaps before we do, I might just respond to a few
of the questions that were asked in the
hearing a couple of weeks ago.
Um, so first of all, just for some context, of course,
the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
or unclos, created the framework
for the modern maritime zones that we have today.
And of course, New Zealand is a,
a big beneficiary of those zones.
Um, however, the areas beyond national jurisdiction,
the high seas, um, are largely governed by freedoms
of the high seas, and that makes it very difficult
to regulate activities, um,
which are increasing on the high seas.
Um, while there are organizations
that manage different sectoral activities such as fishing
and mining and shipping, um, these are very much individual
and there's not been any mechanism to coordinate, um,
those activities or to deal with new and emerging activities
or to establish marine protected areas on the high seas.
We are also seeing that the environmental impact assessment
obligations have not been adequately implemented by states.
So the bb and j agreement really provides an opportunity
to fill the gaps in, in those contexts.
Questions in the previous session, um, arose around the,
the intersection between the BB and j agreement
and existing organizations.
So, um, I thought I'd just talk about that briefly.
Um, the, one
of the principles underlying the negotiations was the
obligation that we, it must not undermine existing
instruments, frameworks, and bodies.
Um, so that means that where there is an
existing organization such as a fisheries body, um,
that is an operation that the ability of the BB
and j COP to influence
or to directly, um, change how
that's operating is very limited.
However, um, the organization is going to be expected,
the cop, the, um, what is expected to create mechanisms
for coordination and cooperation so that there is more, uh,
synergy between those organizations.
Um, and individual states are, of course, welcome
to take the, um, the objectives
and measures that are recommended by the COP through
to those individual organizations.
So overall, it's quite possible
that this agreement will lift the performance of some
of those other organizations.
Other questions were asked about
accountability under the agreement.
Um, so first, all parties will have, uh, obligations
to report on certain matters,
and that always improves accountability
and transparency, which can lead
to international pressure if things are not going well.
Um, there is also a dispute settlement body that will, um,
entail binding decisions if there are concerns about
how the states are implementing it.
And there is also an implementation
and compliance committee, which takes a facilitative
and non serial approach to improving compliance.
So overall in relation to other a law of the sea bodies,
this agreement has a reasonable amount of accountability.
So actually I'll pause here
and invite any questions that anyone might have.
Excellent. All right. Thank you very much
for that summary.
Uh, appreciate that. And I also just wanted to, uh,
thank you for your comments in relation
to the government officials.
Uh, it's always easy to hear negative feedback.
We don't always hear positive feedback,
so I'm sure appreciate
That.
Know they do work very hard on behalf of us.
They do. They'll Probably replay this now.
Yeah. Tim Costley.
Um, thank you. I think
through the submissions we've heard, I've got really,
particularly from people like yourself that have a, a,
you know, a really solid history with this.
We good overall understanding,
but what I've struggled to get some really tangible
examples of what comes from this.
Mm-hmm. I understand it sets up the framework and the Yep.
Pools will sort of follow. But do you have examples,
for example, uh, on the, you know,
promoting cooperation on marine research
and sharing new technology,
or do you have some other specific examples
that will give us something tangible Yeah. Latch on.
Um, well, just relating to marine genetic resources,
of course, um, there's going
to be a lot more information available
to the International Scientific Committee
because when, um, scientists are going out
and doing research on the high seas, they're going
to be expected to provide a lot
of information about not only what they're doing
and what they're collecting, but also about the outcome
and the products that are, that result from that.
And of course, that's something that could be used
by New Zealand scientists, um, in developing,
its doing their own research in relation
to the area based management tools.
I included in my submission an example where, let's imagine
that something's happening on, in the, um, Tasman Sea
and it might, a new activity has risen,
which might have an impact on
fisheries interests, for example.
So one thing that New Zealand might be interested in doing
would be to look to create an area based management tool
or marine protected area, which might limit
or indeed prohibit that new activity that would
otherwise have an impact on fisheries.
Um, and also it gives New Zealand more information about
what's happening on the high seas, including areas close
to New Zealand and gives New Zealand the ability
to comment on, uh, proposals by other countries to do things
that might have an impact on us.
And, and as I understand it, the tools,
although they can happen geographically,
and there's a focus in the, in the, um, agreement on sort
of regional approaches,
the tools once they're agreed on actually applied globally.
That's right. So How, how does that work in the context
of your Tasman example?
Yes, we agree on this tool to sort
of manage this unforeseen impact on fisheries.
Mm-hmm. Does that now apply in the North Atlantic as well?
No. Well, so what happens is states can c come
with proposals to create an area based management tool
or marine protected area.
Um, and if that is adopted by the conference of parties,
then it is binding on all states who are party to the, the,
um, the treaty unless they expressly opt out.
And there is an ability, if, for example,
states feel they've been railroaded by other states
and there's a majority vote they can opt out.
So this is an important pressure valve that was insisted on
by states when, um, the agreement was being negotiated.
But yes, um, the ability for it to apply to all states
that party to the agreement is a real, is real benefit,
But it only applies in that area.
And it only applies in that area. Applies.
That's right. Yeah.
And, and, and if I can just, just one, one last one.
The, the pressure valve. I hadn't heard that before mm-hmm.
Maybe I've just missed it, apologize. Mm-hmm.
But does, does that weaken this?
Yep. So there was a long debate about decision making
and the COP for proposals to create marine protected areas.
And a few countries really were pushing for consensus,
which means that all countries would have to agree in order
for the measure to be able to be created.
However, um, that raised concerns that one
or two countries could stymie the whole process
and just resist, resist, resist.
And, and whereas the entire community might want
to create it, one or two countries might stymie it.
So they then decided on a decision making process.
Um, and the decision making will allow a majority vote.
Now, um, because of sovereignty, states are very reluctant
to sign up to agreement where they might have
to implement measures that they don't agree with.
Hmm. So it is common in international agreements
for the ability to opt out in this agreement.
It's a much more constrained process than other agreements.
So there are limitations on the ability to opt out.
It has to be for particular reasons,
and states are expected to impose sort of similar measures
to achieve the outcome.
So there, it's a much more restricted opt out than you
find in other agreements.
So yes, the answer is, um, it might, we might see one
or two states, you know, opting out, um, in relation
to A MPA or A BMT,
but, um, that that is a necessary inclusion in the agreement
to ensure that other states will be comfortable
in signing up to the agreement. Thank
You. That's really
Tiana to on, uh, Thank you.
Thank you very much for your submission.
I, I was just reading through the conclusion and,
and I wonder if you could share with us the importance
of getting in there early.
Yeah, I think he, he, you say, you talk about, well,
if we ratify the, we should ratify this,
and when we do that, we should get in there as early
as possible to how set the direction.
Yes. So I wonder if you could share with, uh,
members the importance of being at that scene setting stage.
Right. Um, well last time, um, the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs said that they were thinking
that 2026 would be the D date When this treaty entered into
effect at the first meeting of the conference of parties,
a lot of very important decisions are going
to be made about the makeup of the institutions,
the budgets, a whole range of different things
that are actually quite important,
I think, to how it operates.
In my view. It it, while
New Zealand can be involved in the preparatory commission
that's currently trying to work on some of that stuff,
New Zealand wouldn't be able to vote on any
of those things if it wasn't a party already, uh,
at the time that comes into effect.
So my recommendation is that New Zealand aims to be part of
that initial, um, group of countries so
that when the treaty comes into effect,
we can have a say in how it operates.
Yeah. And do you have a sense of who's already committed
to getting in there quickly?
Um, well, I know Australia, well, I've heard,
I don't know, but I've heard that Australia is aiming
to ratify, um, the agreement in time for the,
our Oceans Conference in the middle of this year.
Um, certainly two
EU states have already ratified France and Spain.
Um, and I'm, I'm confident
that there are moves in other places too, to also ratify,
but at the moment, the majority of the states that have, um,
ratified have been developing countries.
So I think it's important for New Zealand to, to,
to be involved, you know, at the beginning. Yeah.
Very good. Uh, final question on, thank you, just a, a bit
of an opportunistic one.
Um, do you think that this agreement might have any
influence over the recent announcement around the cooks
and deep sea mining, the effects of that?
Well, I understand that the intentions
of the Cook Islands is
to undertake deep sea bed mining in the National
Maritime Zone, so it wouldn't have any impact, uh, on that.
I guess it's a flow on. Yeah,
Yeah. No, I understand.
Absolutely.
Very good. Alright, well thank you very
much for your time this morning.
Appreciate the insights. Thank you. Thank for your work.
Okay, thank you. You come to our next submitter,
the High Seas Alliance via Zoom.
Yes. Great. Okay.
Right, I'm here. Good morning
Duncan members. Can you
Yes, good morning.
I can hear you fine. Thank you. You hear us?
I'm actually in, actually in, in Chile,
but I think my connection's not too bad. Um, oh, well
Done. Excellent. Well, it looks
nice over there.
That's beautiful. I'm glad to say here.
I'm here for the South Pacific meeting. Wonderful.
Just a brief introduction to myself.
I'm an international lawyer.
Um, I'm act
as international legal advisor to the Diocese Alliance.
I'm also New Zealand Barrister resident in Christchurch.
I've attended pretty much every bb and j negotiations.
It's, or around 2008.
Um, a large part of my current activities is
to give presentations on different aspects of the bb
and j agreement to countries, um,
what we call capacity building, um, most recently to, uh,
to Val and to the Marshall Islands.
Um, and I'm on the way to give a presentation actually
to Bhutan, believe it or not, um, as well as
to prepare for the PrepCom.
Um, I, I saw, uh, the professor's presentation,
and I, I agree with it.
I also won't go through my,
my presentation, my, uh, submission.
I'm sure you've read it. Um, uh, as Joanna said,
there are currently, I think 17 rev ratifications lately,
France and Spain, which is very exciting
because these are two very significant,
large developed countries.
So, um, it does, as Joanna said, turn around the, um,
the appearance that there's a lot
of only developing states arrive, uh, there.
And we expect o other European countries to join soon
as well as, as well.
I think the Marshall Islands have signaled they'll be
joining in in the next, uh, couple of weeks.
I understand. And just briefly about the heis Alliance, just
to remind you, um, I'm sure you've read our presentation
that we're a coalition of about 40
non-government organizations concerned
with the conservation of the high seas.
Um, we've been very much at the forefront of advocating
for the BB and j treaty since, um,
the negotiations started really, uh, we have worked closely
with the New Zealand mission and New York and,
and organizing again,
what we call capacity building activities and, and,
and involving delegates, um, uh, getting them up
to speed on the bb and j agreement.
Uh, we've looked an active role in the negotiation of the bb
and j agreement, um, and, um, and both in the wording
and in encouraging countries to come along
and be part of it.
And, uh, yeah, we, our,
our current focus is ramification primarily as well
as preparing for the PrepCom, which starts on, uh,
I think the 13th of April in New York.
Uh, that, that's the preparatory commission, um,
which will be developing things like the rules of procedure
modalities, terms of reference for the, for the,
both the conference of the parties
and the various subsidiary bodies,
dispute resolution, uh, those sorts of things.
So that's quite an important, um, meeting.
In fact, there's a meeting in, in New York in the last week
of, of, uh, this month, um, to prepare for that.
So I think that's probably all I have to say on that,
and I'm very happy to take any
questions, uh, from the committee.
Excellent. Thank you very much for that summary.
Uh, we have read your submission, um,
appreciate the consistent vibe.
We're picking up from a number of these submissions around
the willingness to see, uh,
prioritization on the ratification process.
Uh, and also just picking up on your comments around the
consensus, uh, striving for consensus piece rather than, uh,
unanimity being required.
And, and we just heard that from Joanna as well.
I think it's one of the areas where we have seen challenges
and, and other agreements such
as the Antarctic treaty system, which requires consensus,
can, you know, of course it's great to have that consensus,
but it does open up for some states to have a different view
and to be able to hold up progress.
So I think yeah, highlighting that again
as shows we're in a good place on this one.
Um, but anything questions from members?
Excellent. Alright. Enjoy your time and Chile and Bhutan
Too easy. Thank you members, and
I look forward to your deliberations.
Thank you very much. Appreciate it. Bye-bye.
Okay, and we also, via Zoom, we have Greenpeace.
Goda. Good morning.
Good morning, Goda. Hi. Hello.
Welcome. We've, we've seen your submission.
Hopefully you've been following, uh,
the previous submitters in this morning's session.
Uh, we have 10 minutes set down for your submission, uh, to,
for you to speak to your submission today, uh,
including questions over to you.
Thank you. Yes, yes, I have.
And yeah, I, uh, uh, first of all, I would like
to thank the committee for the opportunity to appear today
and express a green peace, a strong support
for the early ratification
and implementation of the BB NJ Agreement by New Zealand,
also known as the Global Ocean Treaty.
My name is Juan Perra.
I am the ocean's campaigner for Greenpeace,
and Greenpeace is also a member of the High Seas Alliance.
So we are very much in support of this ratification.
Um, I would like to acknowledge, first of all,
the process done by signing the treaty
and thus signaling New Zealand's intention
to further multilateral oceanic protection
and the stewardship of the living oceans.
For the benefit of everyone on this planet, um,
I would like to speak on behalf of tens of thousands
of New Zealanders who have raised their voices in support
of protecting the oceans.
Um, speak for the generations yet to come, who deserve
to inherit a world where the oceans are teaming with life
and not choking on pollution or strip bare by exploitation.
A green pea, uh, urges the New Zealand parliament
to ratify the VBNJ agreement without delay,
because more than just a treaty, this is really a beacon,
one of hope for the help of our planet
and a testament to the power of collective action
and multilateralism among nations.
So I will focus on the meaningful
and widespread support
for disagreement from the general public in out there
and New Zealand, and the ways it will help communities here
and around the Pacific facing the challenges of, uh,
changing climate and a biodiversity crisis.
So, um, over the decades,
Greenpeace has already worked alongside other communities,
advocates and leaders across the globe to push
for disagreement here in Ottawa,
that groundswell support is undeniable.
In February, 2022,
over 60,000 New Zealanders had signed a petition calling
for a strong global ocean treaty.
And since, since then, uh, public support has ground louder.
Recent polling from last year, December last year shows
that, uh, 72% of New Zealanders want stronger laws
to protect the oceans,
and 79% wants better protection
for the high seas right here in the South Pacific.
This is clearly an overwhelming majority
calling for bold action.
Um, you would agree that is not very often
that New Zealanders so broadly agree on
that issue in this way, but when it comes to the oceans,
it seems that everyone agrees
that we must manage them better.
So although these numbers are significant
and growing, it's more important to remember
that they represent a cross-section of society
that are united in their view,
that we cannot have a healthy planet without healthy oceans.
They are the Maki who marvel at the beauty of marine life.
They are the families who know
that our wellbeing is intimately tied
to the health of the oceans.
They're the fishers who depend on healthy oceans for life,
for their livelihoods.
And they are migrants like me from all over the world
who are arrived here crossing those very waters some
recently and some generations ago.
They are also the scientists that understand
that a healthy ocean play a crucial role in absorbing carbon
and mitigating the worst effects of climate change.
Uh, New Zealand is a con, is the one, is the country
with one of the largest, uh,
exclusive economic zones in the world.
So we do have a larger responsibility than most to make sure
that we're looking after the waters that surround us
and that are so deeply steep in history
and part of our national identity.
So for this, the bb
and j agreement gives us a once in a generation chance
to do better for the ocean,
because it establishes the mechanisms
to create marine protected areas.
It ensures fair sharing of marine resources,
and it requires environmental impact assessments
for activities that could harm our oceans.
So that said, it's an essential tool
to achieve in global biodiversity targets as well.
Um, ratifying disagreement, it's not only the right thing
to do, it is also what the people of Outra want,
as I've said before.
And by acting now, we would show the world
that New Zealand is a nation that listens to its people
that values the oceans.
Its international partnerships
and that it's prepared to lead.
Uh, we like to think of sales as a good Pacific neighbors,
and that means acting on the benefit of the ocean
and of the nations
that depend on the ocean for their survival.
So we of course, endorse the submission
of the Heiss Alliance, which highlights the technical
and legal importance of early ratification.
It is, uh, as this has mentioned, has been mentioned
before, known that 60 countries need to ratify the treaty
before it comes into effect.
And the more nations that do it,
the more legitimacy in this
international instrument will have.
And New Zealand has the chance to be one of the early movers
and have more influence in where it it will go.
UMO has this chance to lead, to stand in solidarity
with our Pacific neighbors
who are already disproportionately affected
by climate change and the consequences
of reckless exploitation of the oceans.
So the message that, uh, we bring today is simple.
New Zealand has the mandate, the opportunity,
and the responsibility to act.
Now. We are very nearly there.
We have taken the first steps.
So let's finish the job
and be proud of the part we played
by ratifying this agreement.
We will send the message that our oceans are not just
commodities to be exploited,
they are treasures to be protected.
So the people of the OFA
and the communities of the Pacifics are watching us.
They have spoken out on this issue before
because they know how much is at stake.
Together we can ensure
that this agreement marks a turning point for our oceans.
So let us seize this moment
and lead with courage for the oceans,
for the future, and for the people.
Toyota.
Excellent. Thank you very much for your submission, Juan.
Uh, any questions today? I was convinced. Yeah, Tiano, ano
I was saying, I, I was convinced for your submission.
Thank you very much for your, for your, for your, um, um,
strong submission that kind of resonated very, um, um,
strongly with me.
So that's all I just wanted to say.
Excellent. Next question. Right?
Thank you very much for taking the time
to speak with us today.
We've heard your message
and, uh, we look forward to progressing this promptly.
Thank you for your attention.
Cheers. Thanks. Okay.
That brings us to an end for the public submissions
on the BB and j bill today.
Okay. Thank, uh, we'll move straight on
to public submissions for the agreement on climate change,
trade and sustain ability.
There are touch ahead of time.
Do we have Professor Kelsey online? Excellent. Great.
All right. Good morning, professor Kelsey, wonderful
to see you again, and thank you
for your time submitting on the agreement on climate change,
trade and sustainability, uh, amongst others.
But the topic of today's conversation, uh,
we have 10 minutes set down for your submission today.
We have received the written version of that.
Um, we welcome your comments speaking to it. Thank you,
Gilda. Thank you, chair.
Um, this submission is, uh, quite short
because, uh, there's not actually a lot
to say about this agreement.
Um, I, I note though
that I have a submission on the U-A-E-F-T-A,
which was much more detailed,
and I would request a longer period of time
to address the complexities in that.
Uh, in relation to the A-C-C-T-S.
Um, it has of course been negotiated,
um, behind closed doors.
There's been very little information available.
However, I have monitored it actively, uh,
and, uh, made several presentations on it in Geneva at the
WTO Public Forum.
Um, I've also, um, been, uh, an advisor in the context of
Naga, um, but am not speaking on their behalf, uh,
or using any of the information secured from that.
I gather, uh, Maui Solomon will be, uh, presenting
that submission shortly.
Um, put succinctly, the A-C-C-T-S is another example of
what we are seeing increasingly, uh,
through trade agreements of greenwashing in the name of, um,
addressing climate change.
So the four pillars, as, as you're aware, um,
the first two of them are effectively
to advance the liberalization of goods
and services that has been stalled at the
WTO for a number of years.
And again, that is something
that I've followed quite closely.
Um, it, it was interesting to see the minister
and, uh, van Gall vital when he was talking to you,
effectively conceding
that it's basically a commercial agreement.
They focused on what the commercial gains to New Zealand,
uh, would be, uh, from the liberalization, especially, uh,
of so-called environmental goods.
Uh, although the lists of both goods
and services, uh, is extremely extensive, um,
it has nothing really to do
with addressing the climate crisis.
Uh, indeed, one has to even wonder when we are dealing
with the commercial gains, when we look at Iceland,
Switzerland, Costa Rica,
and New Zealand, uh, just
what the commercial gains there will be.
And even if, uh, Mr.
Vital is correct that others might sign onto this,
it is not gonna make the slightest bit of difference
to the climate crisis.
And I'm happy to provide more, uh, critique
of why Liberalizing Environmental Goods
and services does not do that.
Uh, if you would, like, I just note, for example, one
instance in relation to services, which is a area
of my specialization, I can't see for the life of me,
how liberalizing foreign direct investment,
which is mode three on wastewater, sewage, waste disposal,
et cetera, in private companies,
contracting other companies, is going
to advance climate strategies.
Um, indeed, it's more likely to risk posing barriers
because it restricts the ability to regulate, uh,
the environmental activities of those companies
and the ones that they contract.
Um, pillar four,
voluntary eco labeling is neither here nor there.
It's not gonna change the world.
Um, I want to focus, uh, for the rest of my submission on,
uh, pillar three harmful fossil fuel subsidies,
which in theory would have the potential
to make some difference.
Um, however, what we've seen in the, uh,
in the negotiations, uh,
and in the final text is
that Norway has consistently negotiated down, uh,
what is under that pillar, and then decided not to sign.
And I understand has no intention of signing.
Uh, you can, if you look at the text, actually run a bus
through the definitions
of harmful fossil fuel subsidies, the exceptions,
the schedules, the complex criteria
and mechanisms to be essentially meaningless.
And if, if Mr. Vital sees this as a precedent
to be set internationally,
then it ain't gonna get us nowhere.
Um, however, since I made the submission, I've read a paper
by Rory McLeod, who's a former MFA official,
a pro market competition expert, uh, a paper that he wrote
for Peck, uh, for APEC on trade
and climate change in June last year.
And he identified four areas where trade
and climate change would genuinely contribute
to significant, um, impacts on the climate crisis.
The four are dealing with carbon leakage, dealing
with tariff and non tariff barrier escalation, thirdly,
environmentally harmful subsidies,
and fourthly, compatibility of trade rules
with climate change policies or the incompatibility.
So let me just focus on the third of these very briefly,
because what Rory McLeod highlights is the need to deal
with explicit and implicit subsidies where
emitters are not taxed
or charged for the real costs of their emissions.
Implicit subsidies includes subsidies
for methane from agriculture, environmentally
damaging behavior, not having to pay
for it is a subsidy not covered in any way by, uh,
pillar three of this agreement.
Just to put it in context, the World Bank has estimated
that total greenhouse gases from agriculture account
for one quarter
of the world's total greenhouse gas emissions,
almost all untaxed and unregulated subsidies.
Governments at notes are unwilling to discipline them,
but if we included New Zealand, Australia,
and Chile's implicit subsidies,
we would look very different.
And hence, we can see why they're not in this agreement.
Uh, Rory McLeod cites a study by Mike Joy
and others that implicit subsidies for meat
and dairy production in alt amount to, uh,
just under $1 billion.
So if we are serious about addressing climate change in the
trade context, we need to address these issues, not the kind
of greenwashing we see in the A-C-C-T-S.
His final point, which is in relation to the clash between,
uh, in climate change policies
and trade agreements, highlights something that I talked
to you about in terms of the anta,
which is investor state dispute settlement,
where companies are bringing investment disputes
to challenge, uh, four billions
of dollars climate change policies,
and to use that as a chilling effect
to deter governments from implementing them.
So I would urge the committee to, um,
take seriously the inadequacies of the A-C-C-T-S
and recommend more significant action is taken
to address the trade and climate issues.
I'm happy to provide both Rory McLeod's paper and Mike Joy
and others paper, if that will be helpful.
All right. Thank you very much. Uh,
first question, Tim Costley.
Thanks Mr. Chair.
Um, thanks for that, Jane, nice to see you again.
I'm a little bit, I don't know if sad is the word,
but it, it feels like, you know,
even in your written submission you said that this will,
you know, it does make it difference.
You called it minimal, but it's not harming
our, our climate.
Every, I I thought we were at the point
where every little bit counts and, and, and,
and other submitters have said, let's just encourage others
to get on board with this.
Um, why would we be wanting to run away from this if,
if it even makes a little bit of difference?
Because if we take that line, critics will say, well,
why would New Zealand bother with climate change at all?
'cause we're so small. So
what would your response to them be?
My response is very simple. Climate change is urgent.
Uh, we need to address the things
that will make a real difference, not hypothetically,
might make a marginal difference.
And, and the marginality, believe me,
is extremely marginal. But
Isn't anything better than nothing?
No, because what it does is act as a diversion.
You look at the amount of resources
that MFA has poured into this
when it could have been doing something substantial.
They've now got at least three other examples
where negotiations are going down a similar track.
If we put those resources into something
that was genuinely meaningful,
then I would be fully supportive of it.
And that's one of the points that Rory McLeod is making in,
in his, uh, in his paper for Peck, that APEC
dropped the ball on the climate issues.
It's now acknowledged it's a priority,
but it needs to address these real issues.
So I understand that. But now that they've done the work,
if it makes even a bit of difference,
why wouldn't we just take it and,
and go, sure, next time you want to see more,
but why wouldn't we Now that all that work's been invested,
and, and I appreciate your view that that wasn't well spent,
but why wouldn't we just just at least do this as a first
Step?
Because what it does is signal that that's okay.
And, and I can tell you, I, as I said, I'm very happy
to provide you with, um, analysis of why, for example,
trade in services liberalization
and trade in goods liberalization, uh, would have at best
and extremely minimal impact,
because there is no clear link between the liberalization,
for example, of trade and services
and addressing the climate crisis.
And I don't know whether the people, other people who have,
uh, addressed the submission actually have the expertise
that I do on trade and services.
I've worked on it since 1990 intensively internationally.
And I can tell you that there are more barriers
that these commitments were put in place than there are
advantages in being able to address the climate crisis.
And if I thought the committee was seriously going to
analyze the agreement, I would have
provided you with those details.
But my experience to date would suggest
that that's a waste of time.
Final question from the honorable Damien O'Connor.
Uh, look, thank you, Jane.
Um, how much influence do you think we have in the world
of international trade?
It depends on what it is.
Um, as, as, as you know, as a, as a former minister, mean,
It depends on what it's, yes. Well,
It depends on what the issues are, uh,
and where New Zealand's, um, commercial interest lie.
And, and as you know, New Zealand, uh, advances agreements
that it sees predominantly trade agreements
as it sees predominantly in New Zealand's
commercial interests.
And and I mentioned that New Zealand as, as you again,
will know, has been a major advocate along
with Costa Rica and Norway
and Switzerland for the liberalization
of environmental goods
and services, not for climate change reasons,
but for commercial reasons. And
So, well, how do you think, how do you think
that the world is going
to address these issues if we don't share the best knowledge
services and technology
and do it in a way that is not interrupted
by non tariff barriers or direct intervention?
If you were going to do that, you would address it,
for example, by changing the agreement on trade related
investment measures that allow for technology transfer,
you would deal with it in the digital trade. Do,
Do you, I I mean, I think,
Sorry, let, lemme let me finish my answer.
Um, there are areas where there can be genuine transfers
of technology and sharing of technology
that is not going to occur. Well,
This Agreement with All
due, with all due respect, I, I think you have been
to WTO and International four often enough to know
that New Zealand does advocate for that,
but we have relatively limited direct influence.
And so the open plu lateral structure
that we are proposing here is better than nothing,
and indeed might be better than anything else
currently underway across the globe.
Well, could I ask you, um, minister, well,
former minister, um, do you think New Zealand
therefore should be advancing an agreement, uh,
on climate change trade
and sustainability that deals with the implicit subsidies
for the agriculture sector as Rory McLeod has advocated?
That will be real leadership?
I think we must start on the basis of, of the four pillars
where there is agreement and build off that just as other
small initiatives such as TPP had
or had, have grown into more substantive
and useful agreements.
If New Zealand wanted to take the lead on this,
it would find countries other than these three to be well,
The door is open, Genuine agreement.
It, if it wanted to think, I, I mean,
I I am frustrated along with Mr.
Costley because you seem to want perfection
and to sit around
and do nothing rather than to do something and move us forward.
New Zealand could take the lead on doing this
with a number of potential allies at the WTO
or in an open, plural lateral to address issues such
as implicit subsidies.
That would make a real difference. My
Thank you very much Is that you guys don't want to do
that because it would impact on your commercial interests.
All right. Thank you very much for your time this morning.
Appreciate your views on the agreement for climate change,
trade and sustainability.
And I look forward to seeing you again
for consideration on the U-A-E-F-T-A.
Thank you. And can I repeat my request for having a,
a sufficient time to be able to address
that comprehensive 22 chapter agreements
plus the investment agreement. Alright.
Okay. We'll move to our next submittal now, uh, now
via as well,
they're not God said very well.
Okay. Thank you too. Do we have
minute pause?
Um, whilst we wait for the evening to come, um,
to pop back into private session about that aspects,
we are just waiting to be joined
by our next submitter on the agreement for climate change,
trade and sustainability.
Thanks. Good morning, Mr. Solomon. Can you hear us?
Uh, yes, I can hear you. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you. Thank you very much.
Received Your written submission,
and we have 10 minutes set down for you to speak to
that submission and thank you. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Um, so yeah, look, just, um,
briefly, um, Maori Solomon, um,
background in, in law, um, I was the, um,
senior legal counsel for the Y 2 62 claim
for about 20 years.
And part of that claim was, uh, for Maori to have a greater
voice and representation in the development, implementation
of international agreements
that New Zealand's entering into, um, being a CEO
and currently a regenerative sheep and cattle farmer.
And, um, got a, uh, uh,
a native plant nursery here
and planting, um, up
to a hundred thousand native trees on our, uh, who know,
uh, Hindu family land.
Mm-hmm. So yeah, got a bit of experience in terms
of international issues and trade and so on and so forth.
Been on the Fisheries Commission,
but I'm, I'm here in my capacity today as a Pinga advisor
to, um,
and, uh, just a little bit Abouta.
Um, you know, this is a, a, a Maori, um,
nationally mandated body that, uh, arose out of, um,
the, uh, claim that went to the Wang Tribunal, the Y
2 5 2 2 claim, um, an opposition to the,
um, PPA.
And so NA was formed out of that.
And, and so we have a, out of that mediation agreement, so,
um, it's specifically mandated to uphold the TE or to,
and, uh, uh, or,
and, uh, we engage with, uh, amfa across a broad spectrum
of, uh, the development of, uh,
international Free Trade Agreements,
protocols, uh, you name it.
And, um, I just want to, to endorse
and support the submissions of the, uh, uh, the former
presenter, um, the last presenter, uh,
professor Jane Kelsey, who's also, uh, a, a member
of naa.
Um, but look, I, I just, um, uh,
I take it the submission we've made will be taken as read,
but, uh, I want to give the, um, the select committee a bit
of a brief background on, on Maori efforts
in the international treaty and trade making space.
Some may know, some may not,
but I think it's relevant to this court at all today
because Maori have been involved in this space, uh,
you know, even before the treaty was on.
Um, so, you know, really, uh, I want to take you back
to 1835, the, the Declaration
of Independence that was signed by the,
the Northern Northern Chiefs and tribes,
and, um, that, that declared their sovereignty.
That was something that was recognized
by King William back in the day.
And it was specifically, uh, entered into one
of the key reasons was to enable Maori
to trade internationally under their own flag.
And that was a flag that was endorsed
by King William himself.
So Maori had been, uh, trading long
before this nation, this current nation state was, uh,
was formed, um,
and then of course, under the, in 1840,
and that guaranteed to, to Maori.
Uh, the, and as I discussed with the,
in a previous submission, this, the, this morning
to the Justice Select Committee on the, um, uh,
treaty principles, Billa really equates
to, uh, sovereignty.
And the chiefs and tribes did not seeded their sovereignty
in 1840, having just declared it in 1835.
There's no way those, uh, or gust
and fearsome ran five years later,
were gonna see sovereignty to, uh, a lady sitting in,
in a palace, um, on the other side of the planet.
That just didn't happen.
Um, so to ang, he also
guaranteed Maori their continued right to, to,
to make international treaties, um,
and continued to trade in their own right.
So we all know the history, the sad history of our country,
which saw the treaty just pretty much, uh, abandoned
and carbon and literally nwd by rats and mice
and declared a simple nullity.
Um, Maori were marginalized on their own land, so prevented
from, uh, access to, to banking and finance and,
and trade activities.
So we're a marginalized people in our own
country and our own land.
That's the facts, that's the reality.
Um, 1991, the Y 2 62 claim was filed,
and as I referred to that, had a,
a significant international component.
And in fact, um, we sought urgency on that claim
in, uh, 1994, uh, when the GAT trips, uh,
bill was first introduced into, uh, into parliament.
And, um, you know, that, uh, we advocated back then
for a treaty protection mechanism to be incorporated into
that Bill, um, was then the, um,
uh, the Minister of Maori Affairs and,
and he put that to the house.
It would, it was lost by two votes, 42 to 40, just two votes
that, uh, would've actually in entrenched
to treat your wgi protection mechanisms
into the legislation.
However, um, Maori did not give up.
Maori never give up and continued to protest in relation
to the, my agreement, TPPA, et cetera.
Now, Maori aren't just, uh,
protesting against trade and commerce.
We're being traders and commercial people might,
but it's, it's, there's the other aspect
with rights come obligations.
And Maori put their obligations ahead of their rights.
And so the right of the right of Nuku, the right of Rani,
the right of, um, ua, all
of those things absolutely paramount.
The difficulty with, uh, agreements these days, they,
they put profit ahead of, um, papa nuclear people.
And, you know, the Maori voice is very important.
The indigenous voice is very important in this space,
but as being marginalized is being excluded, and, um,
and in fact this, um, this, uh, A-C-C-T-S
or the acts, uh, agreement is another,
yet another example of that.
Um, so I, I just, you know that
yes, um, Naga, um, was,
had limited, very limited access to some of those papers,
but the deal was done before we, we saw it.
It was all shrouded under a cloak
of confidentiality and secrecy.
Um, but, you know, it's called the agreement
for climate change, trade and sustainability.
But really, come on there, there's not, you know,
it's not really addressing the core issues
with the climate crisis.
And I use that deliberately. We're in a crisis now.
That's a scientific fact.
Um, and, and this is just a free trade agreement dressed up
in green drag, um, to be honest.
And so, um, you know, call it for what it is,
it's a, it's a trade agreement.
And actually at least the Minister Todd McLay, when he, uh,
when he signed the agreement
and the press releases I've read, um, acknowledges, look,
it's a trade agreement that the climate stuff is,
is little garnishing on the side of a plate, really.
And, and that's why the Maori voice is needed.
Maori need to have a seat at this table.
They need to be at the negotiating table
as well in these things.
That's the right guaranteed under,
and in fact, the Waitangi Tribunal
and Y 2 6 2 said, on issues, on some issues,
Maori should be, have the front seat, uh, at the table,
but the Maori voice is not being heard.
It's, and, and if anything is being filtered
through a process
that doesn't understand anything about the Maori voice, uh,
or the indigenous voice,
and, you know, there, there are Maori,
what about the indigenous people in, in, um, in,
in Costa Rica and, and, and, uh, Iceland.
And, um, I don't think,
I'm not sure if there are any indigenous people in
Switzerland, but, um, so, you know, that I,
I'm just drawing that, uh, that to,
to the committee's attention.
Um, um, what else have I got here?
Look, it's, it's really difficult, you know, to,
to reconcile this, um, this agreement
with this government's, uh, agenda to, um, to,
to use the word of Shane Jones.
And I know Shane, I was on the Fisheries Commission
with him, you know,
and borrowing the, the term of, of, uh,
president Trump drill, baby drill.
Um, how can you reconcile, you know, this with, with the,
you know, the intention to, to drill, continue to drill
for oil, um, oil and, and gas and coal
and those sorts of things when, when they're making massive
adverse impacts on the environment.
Just doesn't make sense. Doesn't make sense. Um,
Very good. All look,
unfortunately, that brings us to the end
of our time allocated for your submission today,
but appreciate your view. Is
That 10 minutes already? It
Is. That's 11
actually. Yeah.
Come on. I, I thought you fellas were, were, um,
running behind schedule.
I was told you just don't want to hear my voice.
We've given you 11 minutes on a 10 minutes. Thank you. So
Certainly appreciate, mate, I really appreciate that.
Thank you so much. Right,
You're welcome. Thank you
very much. Thank you.
Do you mind just a time up
Right? The
next submission from Animal Justice Auckland
who will be joining us online as well.
Okay. Good morning, Dr. Morris. Can you hear us?
Yep, I can hear you. Excellent. All right.
Thank you very much for joining us this morning.
Uh, we have received your submission.
You can take that as read, uh,
if you've been following along, you'll
see how the process works.
We have 10 minutes set down
for your contribution this morning, uh,
to include any questions if you wish, uh, over to you.
Okay. Uh, yeah, thank you
for agreeing for me to speak on this.
Uh, I agree with a lot of what the last speaker said, that,
um, this is mostly greenwash.
I've got nothing against trade agreements on
environmental issues in general.
I think it's actually a good idea.
I mentioned in my submission that, uh, one thing
that is missing is the elephant,
or in this case the cow in the room,
is the absolute destruction being caused
by animal agriculture.
Um, in my day job, I work for a post-settlement treat,
a post treaty settlement entity.
So I also agree with a lot of
what last speaker said about Maori.
And I do a lot of the resource consent.
So I'm the environmental consultant
and I am just shocked with some of the
absolute environmental destruction of the animal farms.
But of course, as animal justice Auckland,
I'm more concerned with the animal cruelty,
although the environmental issues are
certainly a major factor.
So the, um,
plant-based proteins is not new technology.
The Chinese have been using them for thousands
of years in the forms of tofu
and other plant-based products.
So we really need to explore this technology.
The, um, there has been research showing that that is one
of the best ways to actually reduce the consumption
of animals is to provide, you know,
viable cheap alternatives such as, um, plant-based proteins
and more recently, uh, lab meat,
although we're more ambivalent about that
'cause it's still an animal product.
So I would like to see a trade agreement that encourages
the import export of technology
and expertise in this area rather than some of the other,
um, goods and services.
I, I looked right through them
and some of them are actually encouraging animal abuse
and environmental destruction.
Um, I can give you for instance, the whale
of detection, boys.
Well that's great, but why are we fishing in the seas at all
and excluded devices for dolphin escapes?
Again, best thing to do is not
to fish anywhere where there's dolphins.
In fact, not to fish at all.
Um, if any of you have seen the move the documentary can
see, yes, there's a lot of inaccuracies there
as marine biologists have pointed out,
but the basic premise is true.
We are fishing the oceans dry.
We can't afford to keep going in this
unsustainable practice.
Ever since the 14th century when the cod fisheries in the
northern hemisphere have started to decline,
we have seen more and more destruction of fisheries.
We shouldn't be importing
or exporting anything that encourages that sort of, um, in,
um, pollution, um, landfill liners,
floating oil removal equipment and corks to absorb oil.
And I can send you the numbers for these if you need them.
They are, are listed in the, uh,
in all the goods and services.
Those are likewise actually encouraging us to continue
with polluting industries.
And it's well known in the environmental literature
that if you actually make it, um, that efficiencies
for instance in cars can actually more pollution
because people just used more of it.
I mean, in the seventies, cars didn't have power steering
or all those other features because it costs more in petrol.
We've now got more efficiencies.
People are just using them
to have these as standards in cars.
So that actually happens.
What we need is a change in attitude so
that we stop polluting rot and making it more efficient.
Uh, that's pretty much, much it as far as I'm concerned.
So, um, I'll open to questions.
That's nice. Excellent. Thank you very much for that.
Uh, have we got questions today for Michael?
Thanks. No questions from the committee.
Michael, thank you very much
for your submission this morning.
We appreciate your time speaking to it as well.
Okay. Alright. Thank you. Yes, bye.
Alright, it's a classic example.
Okay, we have now the peace movement
via zoom as well.
Dear,
don't you know what to do?
And I have no client on this submission,
So good morning. Can
you hear me?
I can indeed. Excellent.
Thank you very much for joining us this morning.
Uh, we have 10 minutes set down for you
to speak to your submission today.
We have received your submission in advance so you can take
that as read, uh, and I'll hand over to you.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today
for this international greeting examination
of this agreement.
You'll have seen from our written submission
that peace movement told has period concerns about
disagreement around two key areas.
Firstly, this agreement is essentially a business
as usual free trade agreement
that will not make any substantive contribution
to increasing real action on climate change
or on sustainability despite the name of the agreement.
Um, as per the standard United Nations definition,
which is meeting the needs
of the present without compromising the ability of,
sorry, excuse me, future generations
to meet their own needs.
Instead the um, the Minister for Trade
and Agriculture, Todd's media release
on this agreement is focused on business sustainability in
the interest of economic growth.
As per the examples in our written submission,
the only provisions of the agreement that seem
to have the potential to bring about some standard change
are those around addressing harmful subsidization
of fossil fuels
and the market distortion subsidization can create.
But as we pointed out, those provisions are so weak as
to be essentially meaningless
as outlined in the national interest analysis.
And in any event, New Zealand will not be required to reduce
or eliminate our small number, sorry,
that's a quote from the national analysis, not our view,
our small number of existing fossil fuel
subsidies by joining the agreement.
And right now MB is consulting on its capital markets reform
whereby it is proposing
to reduce the climate disclosure rules on New Zealand
companies, which quickly you are aware of.
So on the one hand we have this flash sounding agreement
and on the other, at the same time,
the rules are being changed so
that companies may no longer be required
to publish transparent
and consistent disclosures co on their plans
and efforts to reduce emissions.
But there's a real contradiction there.
Our second main area of concern is around
and New Zealand's human rights obligations.
We share the concerns about the agreement in this regard
that have been outlined by,
and while we note that the words
have now been included in the text, as
with our comments on climate change
and sustain sustainability,
simply including words is not the same
as substantive action.
The agreement does not and cannot provide effective
and active protection for Maori rights or interest
or for the crown's obligations under
this is particularly crucial at the present time in view
of the current governments apparent attempts
to remove itself from those obligations.
Furthermore, article 1.1, one of the agreement refers only
to more favorable treatment to Maori,
which is clearly not consistent with the consistent
with the guarantee of the continuance of,
or even with the English treaty version,
which is generally used by, we note
concern that the UN declaration on the rights
of indigenous peoples is not mentioned in the agreement
and are further concerned that there is no reference
to any right human rights instrument at all.
While this is particularly concerning in relation
to the collective rights of Maori
as further guaranteed in the shared article, one
of the two international human rights government covenant,
that New Zealand is a state party to the impacts
of climate change and unsustainable
economic activities which harm the environment
by biodiversity human health
and wellbeing will negatively affect the human rights
of all New Zealand is this agreement
does not proceed unless it's sub significantly improved
as outlined in the final section of our submission.
Thank you.
Alright, thank you very much
for your submission this morning.
Do we have any questions for peace Movement?
Uh, RA uh, Dr. Lawrence, Nan
Thank you Chair.
Um, thank you for that submission.
We've heard from a number of submitters
around the involvement of UA as,
or the lack thereof as part of this agreement negotiation.
And I want to check with you
and knowing that we also have received, obviously the trade
for report a little, a few years ago, how would you see
would be a sufficient negotiation
or sufficient consultation with Tanga ua?
When we are looking at trade agreements prior to, so
We, we, we understand, um, the way that, um,
came about obviously, um,
and would not seek to undermine that process in any way.
However, it, um, has always been peace movements view.
She may be aware from all our various submissions,
including on the treaty,
deletions, bill, whatever it's called.
Um, yeah, we think that there should be direct negotiation
with and with Iwi by the Crown
around any international trade agreement.
In fact, any international agreement, not only on trade.
Um, and clearly that doesn't happen
and it looks to us as well from what we know about it,
that even the so-called consultation, which wasn't, um,
you know, like as a negotiation
as we would understand the phrase term consultation with,
um, it was minimal at best.
I mean, yeah, it wasn't a genuine consultation
and certainly not a negotiation. Thank you.
Thank you. Very good. All right.
Thank you very much for your time this morning.
Appreciate your insights
and perspective on the agreement on climate change,
trade and sustainability. Thank you.
Thank you. Okay.
Members, we have a short break scheduled
and we'll be back in public session at 10 20.
Thank you to.